README.rst, before:

-------------
OMS-Kickstart
-------------

Kickstart OMS - to the cloud we go!


intended use
------------

even with its flaws, this is some serious awesome!

overall, this script completes four primary tasks:

1) install and configure salt-minion on the host
2) run state.high to apply some initial states
3) run state.highstate to apply more advanced states
4) if specified, run additional salt modules/functions

default config and state data is included in the script, so no external config
is necessary and the script can run by itself.

when run this way, kickstart-oms.py will apply a set of base states that install
minimal packages needed to clone the oms-deploy repo and setup the host for a
run of state.highstate.

state.highstate will update the system using the salt states and pillar
definitions from the oms-deploy repo.


control flags
-------------

kickstart-oms.py may be run with the following flags:

-d  enables debug logging to share some helpful details
-t  enables test (noop) mode, no actions will be taken
-H  runs state.highstate after the host is setup with the base states
-h  prints help messages
-c  will let you provide a list of YAML-formatted configs
-l  specify logfile to write to, when in debug mode

lastly, kickstart-oms.py will accept external configuration to override the
defaults embedded in the script. this is where we get super awesome, as we are
free to..

1) provide any minion config we wish
2) include any base states to apply
3) include a list of additional salt modules to execute

thus.. this script may be used to kickstart a host with an arbitrary set of base
states, then run state.highstate to apply a second round of updates, and
finally, execute additionalallowing us to do pretty much anything we want with
salt.


how to use this script
----------------------

**at present, this script requires using the example.yaml external config
that is included in the oms-kickstart repository.** this will change in the
future, such that you may run the script completely on its own.


requirements
~~~~~~~~~~~~

* run on Ubuntu 12.04 LTS - no other system is currently supported.
* expects that the user has created an SSH key pair for use with cloning
  any git repositories, else git repos ought to be public.
* run as root, or with ``sudo``, though running with ``sudo`` has not been
  tested (let us know how it works for you!)
* use tmux so you don't run into problems getting disconnected.


use tmux
~~~~~~~~

Given the details of how SSH and long-running processes work, it is best to run
the kickstart from within an instance of tmux, so first start tmux with:
``tmux``. A full tmux tutorial is beyond the scope of this document, but here
are a few helpful details:

* If you lose your connection to the VM, you can simply login again and run
  ``tmux att``.
* Commands are prefixed with a modifier, ``Ctrl-b`` by default.
* You can separate from a running instance, to reattach later, with:
  ``Ctrl-b,d``.
* Create a new window with ``Ctrl-b,c`` (*create*), and switch between with
  ``p``, ``n``, and ``l``, for *previous*, *next* and *last*, respectively.
* Exit tmux by closing all open windows (exit the shell with ``exit``).


default OMS deployment
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

assuming you are starting with a new VM, and are in an instance of tmux..

* create an ssh key with ssh-keygen, saved to ``~/.ssh/id_rsa``
* add the pub key to your github account, or whereever the git repos are stored
* copy `the kickstart script`_ and `the external config`_ to the VM
* run the script with: ``python kickstart-oms.py -H -c example.yaml``
* go grab a fresh beverage and/or entertain yourself for 10 minutes or so
* once complete, the VM ought to be completely setup and ready for either
  additional webapp deployments or for you to start hacking away! you will find
  all OMS source checked out to ``/var/oms/src/``

.. _the kickstart script: https://github.com/IDCubed/oms-kickstart/blob/qa-develop/kickstart-oms.py
.. _the external config: https://github.com/IDCubed/oms-kickstart/blob/qa-develop/example.yaml


other uses
~~~~~~~~~~

by using a custom external config (detailed in the next section), you can define
arbitrary states, a custom minion config, and even run addional salt modules at
the end of the initial kickstart.

omitting the ``-H`` flag will have the script skip running ``state.highstate``
after the initial run of ``state.high``.

use the ``-t`` flag if you would like to test the run first, and enable debug
mode with ``-d`` to see printouts of the states and configs that will be used.

additional salt modules may be specified with the ``post_kick`` config key, the
script will run each of these listed after ``state.high/highstate``.


yaml config
-----------

if you would like to build a custom config, instead of using the defaults
embedded in the script, you will need to include definitions for the following
config keys:

* ``repos``: a dictionary with two subkeys..
   - ``states``: dictionary describing the git repos to clone/checkout for
     states. multiple repos are supported. at least one is required.
   - ``pillar``: single-item dictionary describing the git repo to use for
     pillar data. only one repo may be used. this key is optional.

* ``minion_config``: should include two subkeys..
   - path: the full path to where the minion config should be written
   - contents: the contents of the minion config, as YAML

* ``kickstart_state``: yaml-formatted dictionary to use as the base state to be
  applied. a state should be laid out as follows::
      state_id:
        salt_module:
          - salt_function:
          - arg1: value
          - arg2: value

* ``requirements``: a list of dictionary key: value terms are appended to the
  auto-generated states for git repos, eg the requirements to those states.


The following config is the YAML version of the defaults embedded in
kickstart-oms.py::

    repos:
      states:
        oms-deploy:
          url: git@github.com:IDCubed/oms-deploy.git
          rev: qa-develop
          # specifies the directory within the repo (where to find states)
          copy_path: salt/states
      pillar:
        oms-deploy-pillar:
          url: git@github.com:IDCubed/oms-deploy.git
          rev: qa-develop
          copy_path: salt/pillar

    minion_config:
        path: /etc/salt/minion
        contents:
          master: 127.0.0.1
          file_roots:
            base:
              - /etc/salt/states
          pillar_roots:
            base:
              - /etc/salt/pillar
          file_client: local

    # base states applied after minion is installed
    kickstart_state:
      base_packages:
        pkg:
          - latest
          - names:
              - git
              - rsync
              - openssh-client
      ssh_config:
        file:
          - managed
          - name: /etc/ssh/ssh_config
          - contents: |
              Host *
              StrictHostKeyChecking no
              UserKnownHostsFile=/dev/null
          - require:
              - pkg: base_packages
      install_to:
        file:
          - directory
          - name: /etc/salt
          - makedirs: True
      salt_minion_files_roots:
        file:
          - directory
          - name: /etc/salt/states
          - makedirs: True
          - clean: True
          - require:
              - file: install_to
      salt_minion_pillar_roots:
        file:
          - directory
          - name: /etc/salt/pillar
          - makedirs: True
          - clean: True
          - require:
              - file: install_to


    # these are appended to the git repo states created on the fly
    # (for the repos included in this config)
    requirements:
      - pkg: base_packages
      - file: ssh_config
      - file: salt_minion_files_roots
      - file: salt_minion_pillar_roots

    # execute these salt modules after kickstart complete
    post_kick:
      - 'state.sls oms.admin'


future intentions
-----------------

* the script currently assumes you want to checkout a git repo to apply the
  states from that repo, but maybe you don't.. so we should support making
  the ``config['repos']['states']`` key as optional (along with all the
  handling of git repositories).
* portability - the script ought to run on any system we want to run OMS on.

Commit message:

t1897: document how to provide config to kickstart as multiple files

README.rst, after:

-------------
OMS-Kickstart
-------------

Kickstart OMS - to the cloud we go!


intended use
------------

even with its flaws, this is some serious awesome!

overall, this script completes four primary tasks:

1) install and configure salt-minion on the host
2) run state.high to apply some initial states
3) run state.highstate to apply more advanced states
4) if specified, run additional salt modules/functions

default config and state data is included in the script, so no external config
is necessary and the script can run by itself.

when run this way, kickstart-oms.py will apply a set of base states that install
minimal packages needed to clone the oms-deploy repo and setup the host for a
run of state.highstate.

state.highstate will update the system using the salt states and pillar
definitions from the oms-deploy repo.


control flags
-------------

kickstart-oms.py may be run with the following flags:

-d  enables debug logging to share some helpful details
-t  enables test (noop) mode, no actions will be taken
-H  runs state.highstate after the host is setup with the base states
-h  prints help messages
-c  will let you provide a list of YAML-formatted configs
-l  specify logfile to write to, when in debug mode

lastly, kickstart-oms.py will accept external configuration to override the
defaults embedded in the script. this is where we get super awesome, as we are
free to..

1) provide any minion config we wish
2) include any base states to apply
3) include a list of additional salt modules to execute

thus.. this script may be used to kickstart a host with an arbitrary set of base
states, then run state.highstate to apply a second round of updates, and
finally, execute additionalallowing us to do pretty much anything we want with
salt.


how to use this script
----------------------

**at present, this script requires using the example.yaml external config
that is included in the oms-kickstart repository.** this will change in the
future, such that you may run the script completely on its own.


requirements
~~~~~~~~~~~~

* run on Ubuntu 12.04 LTS - no other system is currently supported.
* expects that the user has created an SSH key pair for use with cloning
  any git repositories, else git repos ought to be public.
* run as root, or with ``sudo``, though running with ``sudo`` has not been
  tested (let us know how it works for you!)
* use tmux so you don't run into problems getting disconnected.


use tmux
~~~~~~~~

Given the details of how SSH and long-running processes work, it is best to run
the kickstart from within an instance of tmux, so first start tmux with:
``tmux``. A full tmux tutorial is beyond the scope of this document, but here
are a few helpful details:

* If you lose your connection to the VM, you can simply login again and run
  ``tmux att``.
* Commands are prefixed with a modifier, ``Ctrl-b`` by default.
* You can separate from a running instance, to reattach later, with:
  ``Ctrl-b,d``.
* Create a new window with ``Ctrl-b,c`` (*create*), and switch between with
  ``p``, ``n``, and ``l``, for *previous*, *next* and *last*, respectively.
* Exit tmux by closing all open windows (exit the shell with ``exit``).


default OMS deployment
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

assuming you are starting with a new VM, and are in an instance of tmux..

* create an ssh key with ssh-keygen, saved to ``~/.ssh/id_rsa``
* add the pub key to your github account, or whereever the git repos are stored
* copy `the kickstart script`_ and `the external config`_ to the VM
* run the script with: ``python kickstart-oms.py -H -c example.yaml``
* go grab a fresh beverage and/or entertain yourself for 10 minutes or so
* once complete, the VM ought to be completely setup and ready for either
  additional webapp deployments or for you to start hacking away! you will find
  all OMS source checked out to ``/var/oms/src/``

.. _the kickstart script: https://github.com/IDCubed/oms-kickstart/blob/qa-develop/kickstart-oms.py
.. _the external config: https://github.com/IDCubed/oms-kickstart/blob/qa-develop/example.yaml


other uses
~~~~~~~~~~

by using a custom external config (detailed in the next section), you can define
arbitrary states, a custom minion config, and even run addional salt modules at
the end of the initial kickstart.

omitting the ``-H`` flag will have the script skip running ``state.highstate``
after the initial run of ``state.high``.

use the ``-t`` flag if you would like to test the run first, and enable debug
mode with ``-d`` to see printouts of the states and configs that will be used.

additional salt modules may be specified with the ``post_kick`` config key, the
script will run each of these listed after ``state.high/highstate``.


stack the configs
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

it is possible to provide the config to oms-kickstart as a set of files, just
include a separate ``-c file.yaml`` for each file to include:

.. code::

   python kickstart-oms.py -H -d -c config/qa.yaml -c config/pillar.yaml


.. note::

   the keys from each file are merged together into one dictionary, duplicate
   keys will step on existing keys when merged.


yaml config
-----------

if you would like to build a custom config, instead of using the defaults
embedded in the script, you will need to include definitions for the following
config keys:

* ``repos``: a dictionary with two subkeys..
   - ``states``: dictionary describing the git repos to clone/checkout for
     states. multiple repos are supported. at least one is required.
   - ``pillar``: single-item dictionary describing the git repo to use for
     pillar data. only one repo may be used. this key is optional.

* ``minion_config``: should include two subkeys..
   - path: the full path to where the minion config should be written
   - contents: the contents of the minion config, as YAML

* ``kickstart_state``: yaml-formatted dictionary to use as the base state to be
  applied. a state should be laid out as follows::
      state_id:
        salt_module:
          - salt_function:
          - arg1: value
          - arg2: value

* ``requirements``: a list of dictionary key: value terms are appended to the
  auto-generated states for git repos, eg the requirements to those states.


The following config is the YAML version of the defaults embedded in
kickstart-oms.py::

    repos:
      states:
        oms-deploy:
          url: git@github.com:IDCubed/oms-deploy.git
          rev: qa-develop
          # specifies the directory within the repo (where to find states)
          copy_path: salt/states
      pillar:
        oms-deploy-pillar:
          url: git@github.com:IDCubed/oms-deploy.git
          rev: qa-develop
          copy_path: salt/pillar

    minion_config:
        path: /etc/salt/minion
        contents:
          master: 127.0.0.1
          file_roots:
            base:
              - /etc/salt/states
          pillar_roots:
            base:
              - /etc/salt/pillar
          file_client: local

    # base states applied after minion is installed
    kickstart_state:
      base_packages:
        pkg:
          - latest
          - names:
              - git
              - rsync
              - openssh-client
      ssh_config:
        file:
          - managed
          - name: /etc/ssh/ssh_config
          - contents: |
              Host *
              StrictHostKeyChecking no
              UserKnownHostsFile=/dev/null
          - require:
              - pkg: base_packages
      install_to:
        file:
          - directory
          - name: /etc/salt
          - makedirs: True
      salt_minion_files_roots:
        file:
          - directory
          - name: /etc/salt/states
          - makedirs: True
          - clean: True
          - require:
              - file: install_to
      salt_minion_pillar_roots:
        file:
          - directory
          - name: /etc/salt/pillar
          - makedirs: True
          - clean: True
          - require:
              - file: install_to


    # these are appended to the git repo states created on the fly
    # (for the repos included in this config)
    requirements:
      - pkg: base_packages
      - file: ssh_config
      - file: salt_minion_files_roots
      - file: salt_minion_pillar_roots

    # execute these salt modules after kickstart complete
    post_kick:
      - 'state.sls oms.admin'


future intentions
-----------------

* the script currently assumes you want to checkout a git repo to apply the
  states from that repo, but maybe you don't.. so we should support making
  the ``config['repos']['states']`` key as optional (along with all the
  handling of git repositories).
* portability - the script ought to run on any system we want to run OMS on.
